# Sass and BEM

Let's set up a new Sass partial for this demo website. In the scss folder I'm going to create a new subfolder called layout, and in it I'll create the \_index.scss file and another file called \_grid.scss. Then in the \_index.scss file I'll forward the \_grid.scss partial. And, in the main style.scss file we'll forward the layout partials.

When you're setting up your Sass files and folders, you can either try to organize and name them in a way that makes sense to you. Or you can try to follow existing architecture patterns like the 7-1 architecture. I'm doing a bit of a hybrid, where I'm using the "layout" name from the 7-1 pattern, but using the other folder names (globals and util) based on what previous jobs have used and just my own preferences. Personally, I think that as long as you keep your styles organized, you don't necessarily have to use a specific architecture.

Let's go back to our index.html file and take a look at the markup. What I'm going to do is use CSS grid to control the 2-column or 1-column layout. In grid, you have a grid parent element, and then the grid child elements. In our case, the main and aside elements are the grid children. So looking at the markup their parent is the body tag. I don't really want to set CSS grid properties on the body itself, just in case we need to add other elements to the body later on. So I'm going to move both the main and aside elements into a parent div.

This div will be the grid parent. And I want to create a CSS class in order to have a selector to identify the grid styles. So I'll add a class of `grid` to the div, then to the main element I'll add a class of `grid__main` and to the aside element a class of `grid__sidebar`. These classnames having the double underscore may seem kinda strange, which is totally understandable if you haven't seen them before.

That double underscore, along with how each class begins with the word `grid` is part of what's called the BEM or block-element-modifier approach to writing Sass styles. Let me show you in the grid.scss file. First, we'll add a selector for the parent, which has the class `grid`.

Then let's add a selector for the main element, which has the class `grid__main`. Instead of having to write a completely separate selector for this class, we can use the nesting feature of Sass, and inside the grid styles, we can write `&__main`. The ampersand will stand in for the parent selector, which in this case is the `grid` class. Then it will be followed by the underscore underscore and main. And we can do a similar thing for the `grid__sidebar` by writing another selector within the parent `grid` class styles, `&__sidebar`.

How do these class names fit into the BEM model of writing Sass? The B stands for `block,` and you can think of a block as a standalone component in the design. In our example here, the `grid` is the block. The `E` stands for `element.` Elements are child items contained by the block, and here we have two child items: the `grid__main` and the `grid__sidebar` elements. And in those classnames, we're separating the name of the block from the name of the elements with that double underscore. So if you look at the markup, you can identify that the `grid` class is the block and the `main` and `sidebar` are elements.

The M in BEM stands for "modifier." Modifiers are alternate versions of either blocks or elements. You denote them with a double hyphen. We're going to use modifiers a little bit later in our demo website. For now we'll just be working with the block and elements.

I remember when I first saw CSS classes that were really long (in my opinion) and had the double underscore, and to be honest, they looked really weird to me at the time. What's the purpose of writing these long compound class names? Well, one benefit to using BEM is that it helps to keep the class names unique, so that you don't have style conflicts if let's say, you had two different sets of styles for a `main` class selector. Also, if you ever changed the name of the block from `grid` to something else, you only have to change the name in one place in your Sass files, as opposed to having to run a Find and Replace for any instance of the `grid` class name.

BEM also is useful for our favorite thing, organization. You may have noticed that the Sass file is named `grid` and the block name is also `grid.` This is on purpose, and makes it easier to track down where the styles are located in your files. Now we do have Sass sourcemaps, which will tell you the original Sass file and line number where a style rule came from. But it's also good to know that if you have a bug on an element that has the CSS class `grid__sidebar`, you could guess that you're looking for a file named `grid.scss`.

The ampersand and underscore and hyphens in BEM do take some getting used to, but I think that they are more than worth it in the end to make working with your styles more organized and efficient.
