# Setting widths

Hopefully you can see how using CSS grid is one way to make a website responsive. And we could use flexbox to create the same two-column layout if we wanted. Before responsive design, websites were generally built to a specific, static width, like 1024px, as most monitors were that size. But that obviously wouldn't work so well today. So try to avoid setting static widths for things, especially for layout styles like our 1-column and 2-column layout rules.

Aside from grid and flexbox, another way to make a layout responsive is to use the "max-width" property. For example, our website right now will take up 100% of the width of the browser. So on large screens, the content is going to be super wide, which is not great for readability purposes. If we wanted to limit the width, we could do something like set a max-width on the ".grid" parent element to let's say 1000px. That way it won't take up the entire width on large screens.

Now, in our website, we can see that at mobile widths the website is still taking up 100% which is good for mobile. Then on larger viewports it's getting capped at that 1000px width. Which is good-- now the text is not going super wide. But the website is only on the left side of the browser with all the extra space on the right side. Ideally we'd want to center the grid so there's equal space on both sides.

One way to center the website content is to set the margin-left and margin-right properties of the ".grid" element to "auto". We can also use the shorthand property "margin" and set it to "0 auto" which will set the top and bottom margins to 0 and the left and right margins to auto. So now we can see that it is centered on the page.

However there can be issues when using the "margin" shorthand property. Just as a quick refresher, when you're using the margin shorthand property, it can take up to 4 values. If you use all 4, like setting margin to "0 auto 0 auto" the order is important-- it starts at the top-margin and then moves clockwise so the second property is right-margin, then bottom-margin, then left-margin.

And if you just use 2 values, like "0 auto," the first number will set both top and bottom margins, and the second value will set right and left margins. And if you want the same margin all the way around you can use just one value like "0" to set it all the way around. You can even use 3 values like "0 auto 40px" which will set margin-top to 0, margin-right to auto, margin-bottom to 40px, and margin-left will also take that auto.

And if you're ever not sure, in the inspector you can expand the shorthand and it will show you all the margins and their values.

However even though shorthand is nice because you don't have to write out all 4 margin properties, you can sometimes run into issues by using it. For example when we use the "margin: 0 auto" we don't actually want to set top and bottom margins to zero, we just have to add that because for a long time there was no way to only set margin-left and margin-right and not affect top and bottom.

So you'd have to set top and bottom to 0, but at some point depending on on the design you might have to cancel it out in a different style rule and manually change margin-top and margin-bottom. Or you could explicitly set margin-left to auto and margin-right to auto, but then you'd be having to write two style rules instead of the convenient one.

But now there is a new margin property called "margin-inline" which I discovered through Kevin Powell. Margin-inline lets you only set left and right margins and it will not affect top and bottom margins. It is called "margin-inline" because it's setting "margin-inline-start" and "margin-inline-end."

And depending on your writing mode it could be settings set right then left, if you're using a left-to-right direction for writing. Or if you change the orientation to be sideways it would affect essentially what's the top and bottom. But if you're using left-to-right writing direction like most of the Western world, and you aren't rotating the element, you can basically consider "margin-inline" to be setting the left then right margins.

So with that in mind we can write "margin-inline: auto" and it will set the left and right margins to auto and leave the top and bottom margins unset.

There is another method you can use to center the content. We could also use CSS grid to do this, by making the body element, which is the parent of the ".grid" element, into a grid parent too. So let's comment out the "margin-inline" property, and then going into the `_boilerplate.scss` file, we can add "display: grid" and "justify-content: center" to the body selector. Justify content controls the alignment of items along what's called the "inline axis" of the grid, which in CSS grid is the horizontal or row axis. (The vertical column axis is called the "block axis") So setting justify-content: center will center the grid child items horizontally. And you can achieve the same thing with flexbox, by setting the body to "display: flex" and again using "justify-content: center." I personally prefer using the margin property to center, since we can accomplish that with just one style rule, and we don't need to set anything on the parent element. So I'm going to leave that but comment it out in the body.

And another newer method of limiting the max width is to use a CSS function called min() in conjunction with the margin-inline to center the content. This is another thing that I learned from Kevin Powell. If you aren't following him on YouTube I seriously can't recommend it highly enough. Kevin is really good about staying up to date on that cutting edge of CSS technology, and he goes really in-depth into CSS. I've learned a lot from him and he's an excellent teacher.

What min() does is that it takes 2 parameters separated by a comma, and will choose the smallest value between the two. We can apply this to our container. On mobile we want the container to go basically all the way across the viewport, so 100% width. But on large screens we don't want the content to be bigger than 1000px. So we would like the value to be somewhere between that.

Let's see what happens when we set the width of the grid element to "min(100%, 1000px)". In our browser we can see that the style rule is being applied, and if we click on the "Computed" tab and filter for "width" it tells us that at desktop widths it is 1000px. The reason that min() chooses to use 1000px rather than the 100% is because 100% would be greater than 1000px, and it will choose the smaller number. Then if we go to narrower viewports, we can see that the computed width is less than 1000px. So at viewports less than 1000px the min() function will choose the lesser number.

And we can do one more cool trick here. If we look at the mobile view we might not always want the content to go all the way to the edges. Sometimes you want a little bit of space to breathe so it doesn't feel too cramped. So let's say I want to add 20px of space on the left and right of the content blocks. We could add padding-left and padding-right to the .grid selector, but if we don't want the padding on desktop we'd have to add more rules in our media query to cancel it out.

And there's a quicker way that we can make this work, right in our min() function. The problem is that for mobile we don't actually want the content to be 100% width. We want it to be 100% minus 20px on the left and right sides. What we can do is set that first parameter to "100% - 40px". This will add that extra space, and since we've centered the content with margin-inline, it will have equal space of 20px on either side. Pretty cool, right?

I'm showing you these different ways of accomplishing the same thing because that's how it is in the real world. There's usually not just one "right" way of doing something, but multiple ways that you can make it work. So it's kind of up to you to decide what you like better and what your preferences are. As long as the code is understandable, responsive, and not taking up a ton of lines of code-- in my opinion, you can choose whatever makes the most sense to you.

I do want to note that am using flexbox and CSS grid in this course, but this should not be considered a comprehensive course in either of those. If you want a deeper dive into flexbox and grid, I highly recommend Wes Bos's free courses on both, Kevin Powell's YouTube videos, and the website CSS Tricks.
