# Responsive Typography

Aside from layout, making your typography responsive is another big part of responsive design. I'm going to show you two different ways that you can do this.

In VS Code let's go into the `globals/_typography.scss` file and add some font-size styles for our h1 tag using media queries. First we need to import the "util" module by writing up at the top "@use '../util' as u;" Then we can set a font-size for mobile, like let's say "font-size: 28px" and then add a media query with our u.breakpoint mixin for medium and up and set that at "font-size: 36px" and then another breakpoint for large and up set at "font-size: 42px". And we'll have to load the util Sass module up at the top so we don't get an error.

Now looking at the website, the h1 tag, which is the "Mythos" title, is going to get larger as the viewport increases from mobile to tablet to desktop. This was pretty standard for sizing your fonts and I'm pretty sure some frameworks and websites still use this method. It works and it's fine, which is why I wanted to show this to you.

Now there are a few ways that we can make the text responsive with just one line of code in our styles. One way we can do this is by using a unit in CSS called "vw" or viewport width. One viewport width unit is equal to 1% of the device's viewport. So on a mobile phone that is 375px wide, 1vw or viewport width unit is equal to 3.75px. On a large screen size that's 1920px wide, 1vw would be 19.2px. There is also a viewport height unit which does the same thing for the height of the viewport, but for our purposes here we will be using viewport width.

If we want the final font-size to be around 28px for a mobile device that's 375px wide, we can divide 28 by 375 to see what percentage of 375 28 is. So we get 0.07466 which converts to 7.5% if we round up. So if we set the font-size to 7.5vw, it should be 28px for mobile widths, and it will go up as the viewport increases. Let's see what this looks like.

In the browser we'll select an iphone emulator, then when we inspect the h1 text we can the final size that results in the computed tab. And it's telling us the font size is 28.1167px. It's note completely exact but it's pretty close. Let's see what it looks like at tablet widths-- now the viewport width of an iPad is 810px, so 1 percent of that is 8.1px times 7.5vw equals 60.75, which is what we see here. You might notice this is a little big. And if we go to a desktop width the h1 tag is getting really big. Probably way too big. And it keeps getting bigger if you have a large monitor.

This is not really ideal behavior. We don't want the font size to increase this much so quickly as the viewport width increases. One way we can sort of limit the rate of growth is to involve another number that's not dependent on viewport size in how the font-size is calculated. And we can do this with the CSS calc() function. Calc() lets you combine numbers of different units which is pretty cool.

In our styles, let's replace the 7.5vw with "calc()" and in it, I'll say "16px + 2vw". What's happening here is that the 16px ensures that the font size will always be at least 16px. And the viewport number is now smaller at 2vw versus the 7.5vw, so the increase in size won't be as dramatic as we go up to larger devices.

At mobile viewports of 375px, the final font-size will be 16px plus 2 percent of 375, which is 7.5px. The final font-size should be around 23.5px. Let's see how this looks in the browser. Going back in our inspector, the h1 computed font-size is indeed 23.5px. Then on iPad it's 32.2px, which is bigger but not by as much as last time. And if we go to desktop viewport widths, the font-size is bigger , somewhere between 36px and on up.

This looks way better than what we had before. There is one problem that you might have noticed, and that's that while we have that 16px to give a minimum size to the text, it will continue to get larger as the viewport increases. So on really large screens the headline may still end up looking a bit bigger than we want.

But, there is a solution to this! And that is the CSS clamp() function. The clamp function allows us to set a minimum and maximum value to our preferred "16px + 2vw" value. So what we can do is write: "clamp()" and in the function it takes 3 parameters. The first is the minimum number that we want to allow, and we'll put in "28px". The second parameter is what's called the "preferred value" and this is where we'll put the "16px + 2vw" which is what we want ideally want to use for the font-size, as long as it's within the bounds we want. The last parameter is the maximum value we want to allow. I'll set this to 40px. And you might note that within clamp() we don't need to use the calc() function, as it does that for you automatically.

Now, in the browser, we can see that even on really narrow viewport widths, the font-size will not go below 28px. And as the viewport increases, the font-size grows but won't get larger than 40px. This overall is a pretty good solution for responsive typography that doesn't require media queries, which is pretty awesome. I will say that clamp() is not perfect in 100% of cases. There may be some edge cases where you don't always want that sort of linear increase in font-size as the viewport increases. But if you ever have a case like that you can always fallback to media queries if you need to. Again they work just fine, it's just nice to be able to write something in just 1 line versus multiple lines.
